Java Tutorial
Last Updated : 27 Jun, 2024
This Java Tutorial is designed for beginners as well as experienced professionals. Whether you’re starting your Java journey and looking to understand the basics of Java or its advanced concepts, this free Java tutorial is the perfect resource for you.

What is Java?
Developed by Sun Microsystems in 1995, Java is a highly popular, object-oriented programming language. This platform independent programming language is utilized for Android development, web development, artificial intelligence, cloud applications, and much more.

In this tutorial, we will cover everything from the basics of Java syntax to advanced topics like object-oriented programming and exception handling. So, by the end of this tutorial, you will have a strong understanding of Java and be ready to start writing your own Java applications. So let’s get started on this comprehensive Free Java programming course!

First Java Program

// A Java program to print "Hello World" 
public class GFG { 
    public static void main(String args[]) 
    { 
        System.out.println("Hello World"); 
    } 
}
Output:

Hello World
For full explanation of the above Program –

Click HereComplete Java Tutorial
Table of Content

Overview of Java
Basics of Java
Input/Output in Java
Flow Control in Java
Operators in Java
Arrays in Java
Strings in Java
OOPS in Java
Classes of Java
Interfaces in Java
Methods in Java
Packages in Java
Collection Framework in Java
Collection Classes in Java
Memory Allocation in Java
Exception Handling in Java
Multithreading in Java
Synchronization in Java
File Handling in Java
Java Regex
Java IO
Java Networking
Java SE 8 Features
Java Date & Time
Java JDBC
Java Miscellaneous
Interview Questions on Java
Java Practice Problems
Java Jobs & Opportunity
Get Started with Free Java Tutorial
Here in this section, you will find all the free resources that you need to become zero to mastery in the process of learning Java programming language.

Overview of Java
Introduction to Java
History of Java
Java vs C++ vs Python
How to Download and Install Java?
Setting Up the Environment in Java
How to Download and Install Eclipse on Windows?
Java Development Kit (JDK) in Java
JVM and its architecture
JDK Vs JRE Vs JVM
Just In Time Compiler
JIT Vs JVM
Byte Code Vs Machine Code
Basics of Java
Java Basic Syntax
First Java Program (Hello World)
Datatypes in Java
Primitive Vs Non-Primitive Datatypes
Java Identifiers
Operators in Java
Java Variables
Java Keywords
Scope of Variables
Wrapper Classes in Java
Input/Output in Java
How to take Input from users in Java
Scanner class in Java
BufferedReader class in Java
Scanner vs BufferedReader in Java
Ways to Read Input from Console in Java
Print Output in Java
print() Vs println() in Java
Formatted Outputs in Java
Flow Control in Java
Decision making in Java
If Statement in Java
If-Else Statement in java
If-Else-If ladder in Java
Loops in Java
For loop
While Loop
Do while loop
For each loop
Continue Statement in java
Break Statement In Java
Usage of Break in Java
Return Statement in Java
Operators in Java
Arithmetic Operator
Unary Operator
Assignment Operator
Relational Operator
Logical Operator
Ternary Operator
Bitwise Operator
Arrays in Java
Introduction to Arrays in Java
Arrays class in Java
Multi-Dimensional Array in Java
How to declare and initialize 2D arrays in Java
Jagged array in Java
Final Arrays in Java
Reflect Arrays in Java
Java util.Arrays Vs reflect.Arrays
Java Array Programs
Strings in Java
Introduction of Strings in Java
String class in Java Set-1 | Set-2
Why strings are immutable in Java?
StringBuffer class in Java
StringBuilder class in Java
Strings vs StringBuffer vs StringBuilder in Java
StringTokenizer class in Java Set-1 | Set-2
StringJoiner in Java
Java String Programs
OOPS in Java
OOPS in Java refers to Object-Oriented Programming concepts implemented in the Java programming language. Java’s OOP features include classes, objects, inheritance, polymorphism, and encapsulation, enabling modular and efficient code development. Understanding OOPS in Java is essential for building robust, scalable, and maintainable software applications.

OOPS Concept in Java
Why Java is not a purely Object-Oriented Language?
Classes and Objects
Naming Convention in Java
Methods in Java
Access Modifiers in Java
Constructors in Java
Four pillars of OOPS in Java
Inheritance in Java
Abstraction in Java
Encapsulation in Java
Polymorphism in Java
Interfaces in Java
This reference in Java
Classes of Java
Classes in Java are the blueprint for creating objects and defining their properties and behaviors. They are the fundamental building blocks of Java programs, enabling the creation of reusable and modular code. Classes can contain fields, methods, constructors, and nested classes, providing a wide range of functionality and flexibility.

Classes and Objects
Understanding classes and objects in Java
Class vs interface
Singleton class in java
Object class in java
Inner class in java
Abstract classes in java
Throwable class in java
Interfaces in Java
Interfaces in Java are abstract types that define a set of methods that a class must implement. They provide a way to achieve abstraction, multiple inheritance, and loose coupling in Java programs. Interfaces are useful for defining common behaviors and functionalities that can be shared across different classes, leading to more modular and reusable code. Mastering interfaces in Java is crucial for building flexible and extensible software applications.

Java Interfaces
Interfaces and Inheritance in Java
Class Vs Interface in Java
Functional Interface
Nested Interface
Marker Interface
Comparator Interface
Methods in Java
Introduction to methods in Java
Different method calls in Java
Static methods Vs Instance methods in Java
Abstract methods in Java
Method Overriding in Java
Method Overloading in Java
Method Overloading Vs Method Overriding
Packages in Java
Java Packages
How to create a package in Java
java.util package
java.lang package
java.io package
Collection Framework in Java
Java Collection Framework
Collections class in Java
Collection Interface in Java
List Interface in Java
Queue Interface in Java
Map Interface in Java
Set Interface in Java
SortedSet Interface in Java
Deque Interface in Java
Comparator in Java
Comparator Vs Comparable in Java
Iterator in Java
Collection Classes in Java
ArrayList in Java
Vector class in Java
Stack class in Java
LinkedList in Java
Priority Queue in Java
HashMap in Java
LinkedHashMap in Java
Dictionary in Java
HashTable in Java
HashSet in Java
TreeSet in Java
LinkedHashSet in Java
Memory Allocation in Java
Java Memory Management
How are Java objects stored in memory
Stack vs Heap memory allocation
Types of memory areas allocated by JVM
Garbage Collection in Java
Heap and Stack memory allocation
Types of JVM Garbage Collectors in Java
Memory leaks in Java
Java Virtual Machine(JVM) Stack Area
Exception Handling in Java
Exceptions in java
Types of Exceptions
Checked Vs Unchecked Exceptions
Try, Catch, Finally, throw, and throws
Flow control in Try catch block
Throw vs Throws
Final vs Finally vs Finalize
User-defined custom exception
Chained Exceptions
Null pointer Exceptions
Exception handling with method Overriding
Multithreading in Java
Introduction to Multithreading in Java
Lifecycle and Stages of a Thread
Thread Priority in Java
Main Thread in Java
Thread class
Runnable interface
How to name a thread
start() method in thread
run() vs start() Method in Java
sleep() method
Daemon thread
Thread Pool in Java
Thread Group in Java
Thread Safety in Java
ShutdownHook
Multithreading Tutorial
Synchronization in Java
Java Synchronization
Importance of Thread synchronization in Java
Method and Block Synchronization in Java
Local frameworks vs thread synchronization
Atomic Vs Volatile in Java
Atomic Vs Synchronized in Java
Deadlock in Multithreading
Deadlock Prevention and Avoidance
Lock Vs Monitor in Concurrency
Reentrant Lock
File Handling in Java
File Class in java
How to create files in java
How to read files in java
How to write on files in java
How to delete a file in java
File Permissions
FileReader
File Writer
FileDescriptor class
RandomAccessFile class
Java Regex
Introduction to Java Regex
How to write Regex expressions
Matcher class
Pattern class
Quantifiers
Character class
Java IO
Introduction to Java IO
Reader Class
Writer Class
FileInput stream
File Output stream
BufferedReader Input Stream
BufferedReader Output stream
BufferedReader vs Scanner
Fast I/O in Java
Java Networking
Introduction to Java Networking
TCP architecture
UDP architecture
IPV4 Vs IPV6
Connection-oriented Vs connectionless protocols
Socket programming in Java
Server Socket class
URL class and methods
Java SE 8 Features
Lambda Expressions
Streams API
New Date/Time API
Default Methods
Functional Interfaces
Method references
Optional class
Stream Filter
Type Annotations
String Joiner
Java Date & Time
Date Class in Java
Methods of the Date class
Java Current Date and time
Compare dates in Java
Java JDBC
Introduction to Java JDBC
JDBC Driver
JDBC Connection
Types of Statements in JDBC
JDBC Tutorial
Java Miscellaneous
Introduction to Reflection API
Java IO Tutorial
JavaFX Tutorial
Java RMI
How to Run Java RMI application?
Java 17 New Features
Interview Questions on Java
Core Java Interview Questions
Java Multiple Choice Questions
Features of Java
Java is one of the most popular and widely used programming languages.
Java has been one of the most popular programming languages for many years.
Java is Object Oriented. However, it is not considered as pure object-oriented as it provides support for primitive data types (like int, char, etc)
The Java codes are first compiled into byte code (machine-independent code). Then the byte code runs on Java Virtual Machine (JVM) regardless of the underlying architecture.
Java syntax is similar to C/C++. But Java does not provide low-level programming functionalities like pointers. Also, Java codes are always written in the form of classes and objects.
Java is used in all kinds of applications like Mobile Applications (Android is Java-based), desktop applications, web applications, client-server applications, enterprise applications, and many more.
When compared with C++, Java codes are generally more maintainable because Java does not allow many things which may lead to bad/inefficient programming if used incorrectly. For example, non-primitives are always references in Java. So we cannot pass large objects (like we can do in C++) to functions, we always pass references in Java. One more example, since there are no pointers, bad memory access is also not possible.
When compared with Python, Java kind of fits between C++ and Python. The programs are written in Java typically run faster than corresponding Python programs and slower than C++. Like C++, Java does static type checking, but Python does not.
Applications of Java
Here in this section, we have added some of the applications that were developed using the Java programming language.

Mobile Applications
Desktop GUI Applications
Artificial intelligence
Scientific Applications
Cloud Applications
Embedded Systems
Gaming Applications
Java Practice Problems
Keep up your pace and try hard till you excel in it. This will need some motivation and resources to Practice Java. So, there are few resources mentioned below this will help you in your journey:

Java Interview Questions and Answers
Java Programming Examples
Java Exercises – Basic to Advanced Java Practice Programs with Solutions
Java Language MCQs with Answers
Java Practice Quiz
Java Jobs & Opportunity
According to report of Statista.com Java is most demanded programming languages after JavaScript by recruiters worldwide in 2024. Major MNC companies are recruiting Java Programmers.

Amazon
Tesla
IBM
Google
Honeywell
Netflix
Meta
Wipro
Infosys
Accenture
Oracle Inc
Deloitte India
Cognizant
Capgemini
Many more…
Java Latest & Upcoming Features
On march Java has released Java 21 and here in this section we have mentioned all the latest features that one can opt in Java 21. Along with this we have also mentioned the pipeline features of upcoming Java update.

Hidden Classes (Preview): Introduces a mechanism to restrict access to specific members of a class, enhancing modularity and code maintainability.
Improved Garbage Collector Ergonomics (JEP 429): Simplifies configuration and monitoring of the garbage collection process.
API Updates: Updates to existing APIs like java.io.file for better file handling capabilities.
Upcoming Features (Expected in Java 22 – September 2024):
Vector API (Incubator): A new API designed for high-performance vector computations, potentially beneficial for scientific computing and machine learning applications.
Project Panama (Preview): Aims to improve interoperability between Java and native code, potentially simplifying interactions with non-Java libraries and frameworks.
Trends in Java Development:
Java continues to prioritize features that enhance application performance and developer experience.
Java’s strong position in cloud environments is expected to hold as cloud computing remains a dominant trend.
Java’s suitability for building scalable and modular systems aligns well with the popularity of microservices architectures.
Expect to see Java evolving to integrate more seamlessly with technologies like artificial intelligence, big data, and the Internet of Things (IoT).
Java Programming Tutorial: FAQs
Why use Java ?
Java is simple to understand programming language because doesn’t contain concepts like : Pointers and operator overloading and it is secure and portable.

What are the major concepts in Java?
There are 4 major concept in Java that is abstraction, encapsulation, polymorphism, and inheritance. Along with this Java also works with three OOPs concept

How Java different to C++ ?
C++	JAVA
C++ is platform dependent.	Java is platform independent.
C++ uses compiler only.	Java uses compiler and interpreter both.
C++ support pointers and operator overloading.	Java doesn’t support pointers and operator overloading concept.
C++ not support multithreading concept.	Java supports multithreading concept.
Why Java is so popular programming language?
Java is based on object model hence it is one the popular programming language.

What are the scope of Java Technologies for Web Applications?
Java Technologies for Web Applications are a set of Java-based technologies that are used to develop web applications. These technologies include:

Java Servlet API
JavaServer Pages
JavaServer Faces
Enterprise JavaBeans
JDBC (Java Database Connectivity)
Java Messaging Service (JMS):
JavaMail API:
JAX-WS
Check More Resources Related to Java Programming



Elevate your coding journey with a Premium subscription. Benefit from ad-free learning, unlimited article summaries, an AI bot, access to 35+ courses, and more-available only with GeeksforGeeks Premium! Explore now!
Want to be a master in Backend Development with Java for building robust and scalable applications? Enroll in Java Backend and Development Live Course by GeeksforGeeks to get your hands dirty with Backend Programming. Master the key Java concepts, server-side programming, database integration, and more through hands-on experiences and live projects. Are you new to Backend development or want to be a Java Pro? This course equips you with all you need for building high-performance, heavy-loaded backend systems in Java. Ready to take your Java Backend skills to the next level? Enroll now and take your development career to sky highs.


